---
title: "AI and Art"
date: "2025-09-29"
tags: ["Art", "Artificial Intelligence"]
standalone: false
---

AI Art is not real art... at least in its current form. 

For the sake of keeping this brief, let's stick to visual art. I often hear claims that current diffusion models, trained on a large corpus of captioned text, has the ability to generate artistic pieces that rival that of many, if not a large majority, of artists, today. To that, I say no way.

A friend once asked me how I could tell a piece of art was AI-generated. Two words: expression and intention. Art is not as simple as just a basket of different lines and colors that come together to resemble patterns. Instead, every stroke, every color choice was intentional. An artist doesn't simply combine patterns together for the sake of making something look appealing. They add patterns with intention, an intention to express their thoughts, their experiences, their opinions... their way of seeing the world.

An AI model today cannot make art out of intention. It fundamentally does not think of creating art the same way we do. An AI model views the world as a multi-dimensional "line of best fit" on our understanding of reality translated into linguistics. It's way of reasoning is fundamentally pinned on thinking in language, but we as humans don't think like that. Some of us might have an internal monologue, but how can you explain the feeling of not having the words to explain something? Better yet, how do you tell an AI model to express its feelings in art if it has none?

The way I see AI Art today is the same way I say its usage in coding: it is a good tool to get a project going and overcoming my anxiety when I succumb to blank page syndrome. AI art also raises the bar for artists. If you are concerned that AI will replace your job because it can draw lines, color, and shade faster, just remember this: art was never about drawing straight lines, it was about expressing something. Use AI to help you express your intentions in a more effective manner.

Yes, there will probably be a large cut of the population who could care less about art, and I guess AI art would fool most of them. But I believe that fundamentally we all view art not just as it is, but at a meta-physical level as well. To have AI art replace all art in this world would be synonymous with removing this world's emotional capabilities of expression, and the fundamental structure of the human psyche probably won't let that happen.

I am not shutting down the idea that perhaps AI could create art in the future. If a future AI model is fundamentally built to have the ability of expression, experience, intention, imagination, and emotion, then perhaps I will consider its generated art as real art. At that point, I would probably start considering it as an actual being...

PS: My art is not AI generated. For those who are not artists, that's like giving us the finger.